To begin, the user must register for an account, so their data can be saved to the SQL database. The user is required to enter a username, password, password confirmation, cycle length, and last period date (using a date picker). There is an error page if the user does not enter a username or password, or if the user’s password confirmation did not match their password. If the cycle length or period date are not entered, the length will default to 28 days (the average cycle length found in studies) and the period date will default to today so that the data is not null. The format of the date is also checked so the program can function correctly using that date. The cycle length must be between 1 and 50, inclusive to exclude negative cycle lengths and absurdly long period cycles, and the last period date must be before or on the current date. The username must be unique so that it does not conflict with another user’s.

To login, the username and password hash must be in the database.

The fundamental aspect of the design of the website is the development of an algorithm. The algorithm takes into account how period and ovulation cycles work. First, the algorithm takes the cycle length and last period date input from the user when the user registers. Then, on the ‘Today’ page, the cycle length is added to the last period date to display how many days are left until the user’s next period. Whenever the user logs a new period cycle, a new cycle length is calculated for the user. This is done by taking the average of all previous cycle lengths (in the function average()). If the user does not log their period when there are 0 days left, then it starts displaying how many days late the period is. Ovulation is calculated by having each cycle start 14 days before the user’s next period date (Source: Clue), which is retrieved from their cycle length. If the user’s period is late, then the ovulation cycle is adjusted to calculate 14 days before the user’s next cycle.

The period cycle length is calculated using the function calculate_cycle_length() where the datetime module is used to easily find the difference between two dates. The datetime module is used in other parts of the program where any operations on dates need to be done. Then, the data s entered into the table “days” inside the database to keep track of all the period cycles, with what user they’re associated with, the start date, and the length of the period. Then the avreage function takes every entry associated with the user and calculates the average of the cycle lengths and updates the user table with the new data. The average function also updates the users table with the last cycle date in the days table associated with the user so that every time the cycle length is updated, so is the last cycle date. The module timedata returns the current date in UTC, so since we do not know what timezone the user is accessing the site from, we decided to keep the times in UTC. So when using the site, it should be kept in mind that the dates are aligned with the UTC standard.

There are a variety of error cases that the algorithm takes into account. For example, if the user has multiple logs in one day, the database is updated every time to adjust to the most recent log. If the user logs a period but changes it so that they are no longer on their period, the period is deleted from the database and the average is re-calculated.

The period flow and symptoms are logged in the database. These symptoms are displayed on the ‘Today’ page (updating every time the user enters a log), and each day’s symptoms can be accessed on the ‘Calendar’ page via a date picker, we used a date picker since it was much more straightforward to access the database using the formatted date.

The symptoms are used to obtain recommendations for the user. The symptoms of stress, pain, and energy levels are rated on a 1-4 basis, with 1 being the lowest and 4 being the highest. The flow level is indicated based on none, light, medium, heavy, spotting.

The recommendation system works by obtaining values of symptoms from the current day and the three prior days. To create accurate recommendations, our code uses the numbers taken from the stress, pain, and energy user-inputted symptoms and assigns a specific number based either on the level on the current day, or based on the sum of the level over the past couple days. Thus, it represents a multi-faceted recommendation system that allows for the addition of a stress-relieving recommendation if the past couple days have been very stressful despite what the user feels on the current day. Overall, the recommendation system being designed the way it was is tailored in the most effective way to appease the user’s symptoms over the past couple of days and on the current day.

For our CSS, we tried to use the most appealing bootstrap design to create an aesthetic feel to our website. For our HTML, we used Finance as a base for navigation and customized it thoroughly to suit our needs and used Jinja to create adaptable webpages based on Python input.

Overall, we designed our website to be incredibly intuitive and easy to navigate to create the best user experience possible. Any other design questions can be seen in comments throughout our code. We hope you enjoyed seeing our final project!
